---
title: 'Why Software took over the World'
description: 'A brief history of the rise of software, from the perspective of a random dev on the internet'
pubDate: '2024-07-27'
heroImage: 'images/software_vortex_around_the_world.webp'
author: Hendrik Crause
---

Have you ever wondered why software has taken over every aspect of our lives? What is it about this series of mathematical operations that lends itself to be so widely integrated into our work, our social lives and even our time off. Is it the magic of seeing our typed words turned into whatever we imagined? The speed and efficiency with which we are able to complete tasks that used to take hours or days? The ability to send messages across the world at unimaginable speeds? While all of these things truly are amazing, I do not believe that those are the reasons why software is everywhere today. The real reason I believe - with no real evidence outside of my own experience - is the ability it gives us to automate away the mundane.

In the beginning, before we had AI and the internet and high definition screens or any screens for that matter, computers where primarily used for solving large or complicated mathimatical equations. The scientists who used them had to type out their programs on punch cards, feed it into the machine the size of a small family home in the right order in order to get the result a few hours later. But why? Why spend all that time learning how it write the code to make it work, painstakingly write it out on physical cards and spend a fortune on this equipment just to do some math? Because doing it by hand would take several people, several weeks to complete. With a much larger chance of mistakes being made. Programs can also be executed multiple times, with different inputs, which means that once the equations were written as software, no further human calculation would be required. They automated it away.

A few decades and several improvements later, the business world realized they can use these same machines to increase the productivity of their accountants. What used to take entire departments of people weeks of copying numbers from one piece of paper to another so they could be properly added together could now be done by a small team of people typing on a few computers. Financial transactions no longer needed to be tracked via paper slips. All the tedious, error prone tasks could be offloaded to software.

Today, software plays a part in just about every aspect of our lives whether we realize it or not. When we travel, there are several thousands of programs all around responsible for booking and scheduling flights, checking the validity of tickets, determining what weather conditions are at your destinantion. We use software for managing our schedules, entertainment, communication and a large portion of jobs are exclusively done on a computer with some piece of software. Even most factories and farms have been automated to the point where humans act more like supervisors to the machines than actual laborors. Every piece of our lives that can be automated by software either already is or is in the process of being automated.

And with every new development - be it AI, performance gains in hardware, new software tools or even just a new way of thinking about a problem - the scope of tasks that we get to automate keeps increasing. And as long as there is something, anything, that some person, almost anyone, in the world finds too tedious to do then there will be demand for good software developers to help automate it for them.
